---
layout: post
title: "Week 3: Malware Defense"
draft: true
---

Week 3: Malware Defense
=======================

We've spent two weeks looking at Malware.
First, we looked at how malware works and how to analyze it.
Next, we looked at how to gather evidence from a malware attack.

But those are both reactionary - something that takes place after the malware
has already gotten into your system.

How can we actively *defend* against malware?


Attack Graph
------------

All malware follows the following steps

1. first contact

    Malware gets onto the machine.

    def. mention watering holes

2. local execution

    After the code gets onto the machine, it needs to get executed.
    There are three general ways this can happen.

    * **Social engineering**
      Trick or coerce the user into excuting the code themselves.

    * exploiting a bug

    * exploiting a feature
      For example, Windows autoruns.

3. establish presense

    *

4. malicious activity

    

Defenses
--------

We can attempt to defend at any of these points.


I want to take a moment to call out the idiot in class who suggested that
we need better users. This is called *blaming the user*, and it is always
a bad idea.

It's true that you can't have a secure system without some buy-in from the users.
Security is a mindset, and a property of a system, not something you can just
add in after the fact like magic security sprinkles on an insecure cupcake.
But! The point isn't that users can't be trusted, only that you can't secure a system
if your users are actively trying to subvert it.
If people are doing what you tell them to do, and they still get infected,
then you've fucked up.

As computer security expert Bruce Schneier says,

> Users are free to click around the Web until they encounter a link to a phishing website.
> Then everyone wants to know how to train the user not to click on suspicious links.
> But you can't train users not to click on links when you've spent the past two decades teaching them that links are there to be clicked.
>
> We must stop trying to fix the user to achieve security.
> We'll never get there, and research toward those goals just obscures the real problems.
> Usable security does not mean "getting people to do what we want."
> It means creating security that works, given (or despite) what people do.
>
> —<https://www.schneier.com/blog/archives/2016/10/security_design.html>

*Stop blaming the user.*

<\/rant>


Yara
----

[Yara][] bills itself as "the pattern matching swiss knife for malware researchers".
Yara is a rule engine similar to the ones used in Antivirus software (AV).
We couldn't play with a real rule engine because they are all proprietary,
so we used yara.

[yara]: https://virustotal.github.io/yara/

There is an [editor for yara][yara-editor], although it looks unmaintained,
and honestly it doesn't do much.

[yara-editor]: https://github.com/ifontarensky/yara-editor

- Yet another regexp analyzer
- Yet another rule engine
- You are really awesome
- Yara assesses recalcitrant algorithms


The zen of writing AV rules:

1. smaller rules are better
2. be precise
3. but not too precise
4. don't flag OS files


### Sample 1 ###

 sytro

[file list photo here]

i noticed the string “Jenna Jam” in strings in a couple of the executables, so let’s try that.
turns out it identifies all the samples! and none of the System32 files. good

[jenna jam photo]

Turns out that i got lucky - the full string is Jenna Jameson, but the executable i looked at first was packed with UPX, so the ending got garbled.

We can tell it was packed with UPX by the appearance of the string UPX0 near the beginning of the file.

[upx0 screenshot]

I think i would want to search around for a string that is more “actively malicious” in the malware to pair the Jenna string search with, if this were a real case
note: a real av engine would unpack 

The rule i ended up with was

    rule Sytro {
        strings:
            $jenna = "Jenna Jam"
        condition:
            $jenna
    }

The instructor did the same thing but also added another string

    rule Sytro {
        strings:
            $str24 = "Jenna Jam"
            $str40 = "aiwtQ" // or something
        condition:
            $str24 and $str40
    }


This is better because there will probably be fewer false positives,
but you have to find the string aiwtQ first, and notice that it is in
every malware sample.



### Sample 2 ###

This sample 

DownloaderActiveX




Acknowledgements
-----

This post was based on lectures given by [Craig Schmugar][],
Research Architech at McAfee.

[Craig Schmugar]: https://www.linkedin.com/in/craigschmugar
