---
title: "Week 5: Rootkits"
layout: post
draft: true
---

Week 5: Rootkits
================

This week we dive into windows internals to learn about rootkits.
This is going to be a shorter post this week because i'm burning myself out writing these.


Hooking
------

Once a piece of malware has gotten onto your system,
as we discussed in [week 3][],
one of its primary goals is to blend in or hide.

The malware we've seen so far has tried to blend in by choosing names
which could plausibly sound like system process;
or tried to hide its actions by deleting its installer files
and trying to keep a low footprint on the machine.

But the other way to hide is to trick the operating system into lying about
what's on the system.
If you can't see the malware process running in process explorer,
and you can't see its files in on the filesystem,
and you can't see any of its registry keys,
it might as well not be there.

We call these programs rootkits.

The primary method used by rootkits to hide themselves is called *hooking*, which is where
the rootkit replaces some system call with its own code which filters itself out of the results. 
For example, one of the rootkits we analyzed this week hooked the NtQuerySystemInformation call to hide itself from the process list.

Rootkits primarily run in the OS kernel (at least partly),
because the kernel is what's responsible for giving other programs
their view of the world; that the code they need to hook.

There are lots of potential places for hooks.
Here are a few:

- [System Service Descriptor Table][ssdt] (SSDT). When a system DLL needs to call into the kernel, it goes through this table. Windows looks up the index of the system call and runs whatever function it points to. I think this is similar to whatever structure in the linux kernel maps syscall numbers to handlers.
- [IRP][irp] table. This seems to stand for I/O Request Packet, which is some sort of structure that Windows uses to keep track of pending I/O requests.
- [Interrupt dispatch table (IDT)][idt]. Every OS has a table of interrupt handlers; when the processor receives an interrupt, it jumps to the appropriate address in the interrupt dispatch table.
- [SysEnter/Int 0x2E][msr]. SysEnter is the instruction on x86\_64 CPUs for making a system call. INT 0x2E is what windows used on 32-bit CPUs, before there was a dedicated instruction for it. (Linux used INT 0x80). If a rootkit can hook the syscall mechanism, it can intercept any and all system calls.


[irp]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/I/O_request_packet




Tools
----

Before going any further,
let's take a break to talk about tools.
The problem with a rootkit is that it runs in the kernel,
so if you want to be able to poke at it and debug it,
you have to be able to debug the kernel.

- [LiveKd][] from Sysinternals is a _live kernel debugger_
  with a command-line interface similar to WinDBG.
  It allows you to peek at kernel memory from inside a running system.
  There's a huge caveat though: you can't change anything, and you can't pause the kernel to step through things. In other words, it is a read-only view of the system. It can't write.

- [WinDBG remote][] allows you to attach WinDBG to a running kernel on another system.
  This gives you the full power of a dubugger, including the ability to pause the program,
  step through instructions one-at-a-time, and change memory to your heart's content.
  The reason it has to be *remote* is that when you pause the kernel, you pause the entire system. You can't interact with a system at all while it is paused.
  One way to set this up is to run two VMs with a virtual serial connection between them.
  Another way, presumably, is to run two physical machines with a physical serial connection between them.

- [Tuluku][] is a handy little program which looks for known tricks that rootkits play, like hooking the SSDT table, and flags suspicious entries.

- [Process hacker][] is like Process Explorer, but it allows you to read and modify a process's memory. And other things.

[livekd]: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sysinternals/downloads/livekd
[windbg]: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-hardware/drivers/debugger/
[Tuluka]: http://tuluka.org/
[Process hacker]: https://processhacker.sourceforge.io/

Agony
-----

We explored SSDT hooking in great depth by  analyzing a rootkit called [Agony].


Userspace hooking
-----------------

Although I said rootkits usually infect the kernel,
it's actually possible to hook entirely in userspace
(provided you're running in kernel mode or with admin permissions so you can write to other processes' address space).




Bootkits
-------

Bootkits are even lower-level than rootkits.
Rootkits attack the kernel, but bootkits go one step deeper and attack the bootloader.
Since the bootloader runs even before the operating system kernel gets to run,
this gives them even more control over the system.

It also helps them hide better, just by virtue of the fact that the malicious code is stored in the master boot record rather than a file in the filesystem, making it invisible to file-based antivirus scanners.


### Boot sequence
1. BIOS initializes the hardware
2. BIOS calls code in Master Boot Record (MBR) sector of disk 0
3. MBR loads bootloader from boot sector of the active partition
4. bootloader run second stage bootloader from filesystem
5. second bootloader does some stuff, presents a boot menu, whatever
6. second bootloader hands control to the OS kernel


Bootkits typically



Homework
--------

We were given a challenge this week to write a program that could enumerate all running processes, threads, modules in a a process, and memory pages in a process.


I found two different Windows APIs to do that.

First, [PSAPI][] is a windows library for enumerating and manipulating processes.
It has functions like
`EnumProcesses`,
`EnumProcessModules`

[PSAPI]: https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/desktop/ms684894(v=vs.85).aspx
[Tool Help]: https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/desktop/ms686832(v=vs.85).aspx

Second, i found a library called ["Tool Help"][tool help], with functions like `Createtoolhelp32snapshot`, 
`Process32Next`,
`Thread32Next`
which appears to offer a similar funtionality. The difference is that Tool Help
seems to create a snapshot of the process or the system under inverstigation,
giving a more coherent view,
whereas the PSAPI functions appear to be more real-time and give a more up-to-date view of the system.

Conclusion
-----

i love this class because there is so much hand-on knowledge here.
so much hard-won esoterica about windows internals and debuggers and
tools people have written to counter malware
folk knowledge


Acknowledgements
----------------

This post was based on lectures given by
Aditya Kapoor of
Intel Security.

